Sen_Eng
he took
he takes
Earth
he liked
he likes.
he watched
he watches
he slept
he is sleeping
he vomited
Thinks
He vomits
He spoke
he speaks
he spent
he passes
he entered
he enters
he put
he puts
he ate
The banana
he eats
he knew
he knows
he let go
he licks
he split
he splits
he wrote
he writes
it's bitter
it's bitter
Starvation
Tell me
It's me
Why?
I am thirsty
It's Moyo
Excuse me
The dog.
Reading
He cried.
He cries often.
He didn't cry.
He saw us.
It is so clean.
He is not king.
He returned from the bottom.
He bled.
I drank water.
They bled.
He washes your clothes.
He will endow the woman.
Pieces of sentences.
You bought the hen.
We had seen water.
You washed your clothes.
He doesn't know any secrets.
I don't know meat.
We had bought the hens.
I went to pick the plum
They leave to endow women.
They don't know any secrets.
You don't know meat.
We left to cut the plum tree.
Hymn of Ghomala '.
Let's go learn Ghomala '.
People of Binam (Bamileke), stand up.
He is a keeper.
What are you doing?
Shame why?
The dog is important
I am learning the ghomala
Of your actions
Let's put it off until tomorrow
It does not matter.
father, I'm hungry
he took my pen
I learn alone
he poked my eye out
he bent
I am very hungry
Nono is my friend.
Have you seen the student?
He cries every night.
He bought a plantation.
Nono is our student.
The fish don't cry.
I'm not hungry
you took his money
If you wish
he cut the end
he hates me a lot
you paid for the meat
you often pay for meat
you took out of my pocket
you take it out of my pocket
The first group
Verbs a` ton haut
It's the tagne affair
tagne, where do you come from?
I come back from the chiefdom
How do you do it?
Are you making it out?
Are you not ashamed?
You know it
Before to sleep
When the day breaks
A man who jumps.
When the sun rises
he quickly stands up.
He goes out and stays in the yard
Start hopping outside
Place the knife on the stone to be crushed
Let's not talk about it anymore
Let me talk too
Where are you going my friend?
The verb has two groups
I'm going to the hospital
Who is looking for me?
He listens to the radio
I am a student
And you what do you do?
I get it. Goodbye.
Is fine! See you tomorrow
I'm going to starve
It's hard to say
If I understood correctly
No problem
Tell her to wait for me
He is in a hurry
I have a lot of occupations
List some see
It's useless now
When it is clean it shows.
He goes to the field in the evening.
It was the son of God who said it.
You wash your face every morning.
I am cheating on them.
Someone was talking jokingly yesterday.
Before taking that you deposited in advance.
Beware of ruining your family.
Beware of misleading his name.
Before taking care (think first).
We will be leaving at noon
beat him until he shoots.
bon appétit to you ooo!
Remove and put on a plate.
while turning, add water.
carry and come with me the tasting.
You are going to work tonight
Happy morning to you
Morning of the people of Yogam
Happy morning oh oh oh oh
Happy morning oh oh oh oh oh
Happy morning eh, yeh, Yogam e
Happy morning oh oh Yogam e
Happy morning to you, people of Yogam
Happy morning to you, people of Yogam
Yes, I have a book and a magne´tophone
Now come eat
Do as you like
Talking is not enough
Rather continue tomorrow
Gone, gone, hallelujah.
Go learn science.
The little ones of our homeland.
Pack your backpacks and hit the road.
You little ones of our homeland! Lift up with vigor!
Writing and reading are necessary
I know it; don't talk about it anymore
I understood, I will fight
It's good, I congratulate you very much
Obey your mother, don't be quiet
It is not stubbornness; I arrive
Wait for me. Wait for me in the evening
If he wants him to watch TV too
Sieve, remove the pulps and put behind.
Carry the corn powder and pour it into the pot.
my business is all about me
That your business is all about you
I am concerned with the problems of the chiefdom
You worry about the plate problems
Armel, where are you? I need you
The mother bitches is so strict.
The shortcut had deceived us.
Black clothes are not difficult to wash.
The white cat eats the black mouse.
They are victims of a bad deal.
You don't wear dirty clothes before washing.
The shortcut had cut off the foot of the partridge.
Take the small plate and go put it outside.
The goat relishes the young grass regrowth.
The skinny kid you know is dead
Take the dirty clothes to wash in water.
The black cat is eating the white mouse.
Shell the weevil corn and go toss it to the hens
The dog's plate doesn't confess until we understand.
Don't wear the dirty clothes to put yourself among the people
By wearing the clothes, make sure that they are clean clothes
Let's read these sentences and try to translate them into French.
A motionless cow is in the field eating the young grass shoots.
When the dog is overly severe it is dangerous;
No one can enter a house where there is a dog without being chained.
When he sees an individual who is unknown to him, he immediately begins to bark.
Another dog is so severe that he even forgot the one who often feeds him.
My father Lyenue is a hopping man.
And drink bottles of wine to trip over.
And imagine the places he will travel.
However, he had destroyed himself through laziness.
Here I am, I am in the bedroom
What is he upset about?
Take a look at him.
I am tired. I'm dying of fatigue
If you're wise you run away
Why didn't you tell me
It's because he's no longer stingy
So do not suffocate him any more.
What is your profession?
I am a trader
How is the market going?
Where do you live I live in Pe`te
I live with my father and my mother
I live with a friend of mine
We should never live alone
Why are you going there?
To visit a friend
Wait for me to tell you
We will go together
If you don't find any inconvenience
Once there you greet him for me
What are you going to eat?
Give me anything
Hungry stomach has no choice
Except I'm in a hurry
Tell him to come back tomorrow
He won't accept
I don't say it for nothing
Don't just harass me
let him do as he pleases!
Leave me; I am tired
Speak then; I'm all ears
So that we say something in our ears
What did you do to be tired?
Ripe bananas are good.
Let everyone plant their banana plantation.
While softening, it becomes sweet.
When you consume, your body becomes energized.
It is with red oil that we plunder.
It doesn't itch, me Sticky again.
We don't eat unripe bananas.
remove the couscous and wrap it with leaves.
How to prepare corn couscous and Nkwii.
while resting, start to prepare the Nkwii.
tasted, it's cooked. Remove the pot from the heat.
turns tasting until cooked.
Taste, until it's tasty in your mouth.
You don't just have to go to the market to buy it.
We knead the unripe banana, to plunder a meal.
When one eats the plundered with the hand, one finds appetite.
Sieve again, remove the bran from the corn flour.
Seed the corn and go grind it in the mill.
I will die of thirst
Give me water to drink.
My throat is drying up
Wine cannot replace water
he is very angry. He gets too angry.
Food is fine in the rainy season
It is sunny in the dry season.
Go join your business.
Food shortages are great during the lean season.
The farmer does not suffer
Do you know me?
My business is about the problem of eating
My business concerns the problem of the royal palace
Leave me alone in my business
Father just keep quiet and let me tell you eh!
It is not the plate that will resolve my problem.
There was a lack of (clean) tagne dish.
Hasn't that time already passed?
You've already grown up to the point of measuring yourself against me.
No, don't say that I despised you.g ???!
No, I don't know you, tell me your name.
I had come very late;
I would be the bean for a week.
Our classroom was upstairs.
In addition, I asked myself in these terms:
Until then, I didn't know as much as they did.
Earth is an element that cannot be measured
if you want, you shape it and put it on a plate.
the water has boiled; remove the Nkwii and put it on a plate.
pour the corn bran into the pot before turning.
carry the Nkwii Already prepared, pour it into a pot and beat it.
bring the pot and put it on the fire, then put water in it.
Bean and banana plunder appeals to children, to the point where, there's no way to describe it.
throw the Nkwii inside and wait for the water to boil.
beat it, and taste if the salt or the ash vinegar was enough in it.
wear the recommended condiments that you had already crushed and pour them in.
take the Nkwii and peel it, take the banana string and tie it with it.
The land worker cannot sleep hungry
They say that God used the earth to make man
As you spent the day with the King, go ask him
You are brave, what were you going to do in the chieftaincy?
Tagne leaves the chiefdom affair alone, begins with the plate affair.
So are you going to put your share of food in the chieftaincy business to eat ?.
Do you despise me to this level, Tagne? you despise me up to this level ?.
Water is more abundant than the land, but it is the land that supports the water
Wanting to get out of a place forever, when leaving we tap the earth with our feet
When you gave birth to me, did you foresee that it would be up to me to come and wash your plates ?.
When I was giving birth to you, I expected you to come and help me.
I'm overtaken by Tagne oo, It's Tagne's business.
As sleep had taken him.
However, he was overwhelmed by the situation.
When he came in brush, he was tired.
He straightened up and saw that it was a ferocious animal.
Tagne be compassionate to me Here I am all exhausted.
By barking he will try to bite the one who has visited them without him knowing him.
Because, he can remain hungry, his meal being nevertheless there; but no one risks giving it to him.
However, the bravest will come, take part of his meal and throw it to him, being afraid to come close to him to bite him.
Notability is no small matter.
In addition to this, the notable will learn to be a judge
Just as it is accessed before learning to intercede;
He who walks with notables will become friends of notables;
The lazy one can die of hunger, He suffers without ceasing.
Secrets being many, he will seek, he will seek that we reduce to smaller
It is impossible to enter the La'kam without having a notable wife, without having a Tabwe,
For that he would have to seek his intercessor; one cannot receive notability without passing the La'kam there;
If I was still a toddler, which you would have typed me correctly.
Wait until I remind you that you are my father, eh! It is not the King my progenitor.
Leave me like this ... it's the chieftaincy business that occupies me.
He had immediately slipped up a tree.
He had taken refuge under a tree to rest a little.
The animal scratched its face and hair, rolling on the ground.
He thought he was sleeping when he heard a noise through the forest.
Once upon a time, a hunter would go to a field to hunt.
Besides, he saw a snake which had coiled on a tree branch.
I was to meet King Bayangam very early this morning.
Father, you know your business is my business.
Go, you should wash the plates before you go.
My name is Somo, and what is your name?
Help, come and understand, ooo, these are Tagne's problems with despising her father.
I wish you a happy morning, Happy morning to you, people of Yogam.
Dad, I imagined that when you came back from the royal palace you would have washed already.
He noticed that a kind of black ants stung him and had invaded his body up to the head.
These ants immediately spread on his face and his hair, starting to peck him.
He tried to endure, but in vain, and took the courage of men to take down the anthill and strike it on the face of this ferocious animal.
He glanced up and down; to take a step forward was not possible, still less to take a step back; because this animal had already settled under the tree.
This man heard the ferocious beast tell the black ants, to let go of their teeth and together they use the claws to fight it, He quickly picked up speed to get down from the tree, asking time to quicken its pace.
I entered and saw the students, who already knew how to write well, and also knew how to read the alphabet well.
My fathers, mothers, friends! May God increase our days and that each one can register in the year two thousand and eight, so as not to lose like me.
I registered, and went to enter the great hall with the others, together we performed the hymn of freedom of our nation with prestige in ghomlá '.
We were then dispersed, and each went to his room.
We also performed the song of the Binam people, then counted to ten.
Where was i? What was I doing until hanging around so much? While reading, we came back to me.
All good things come from the earth: starting with water, to oil which is a treasure these days.
The man seeking to bear witness for a matter, wanting to prove that he speaks seriously, you will see that he will lick the earth.
I'm sick of jail.
We put in the corn couscous.
They had fled the prison.
The environment was so red.
They withdraw and drank it non-stop.
And they began to eat it without sauce.
Arriving in Dschang village,
To endow a daughter of Dschang there.
We had been to the Dschang region;
We were depositing a very red wine;
We are talking about a slender and so brown.
The central prison of the city of Dschang.
And they had worn ragged clothes.
these rips were weird and so red.
Read and reread
it is insignificant. Don't worry about it.
The chick dreads the hawk. It is his enemy.
We had started doing things in the past.
We do not cry mourning before mourning. Don't cry no more.
put the soap on the plates. I will wash it later.
He obeys his mother a lot. He doesn't make any problems.
A person's soul does not sleep. He spends his night walking.
You didn't put any chili in that sauce. You know it's not spicy.
The child says goodbye to fetch water. I will die of thirst.
he did not buy the pros at the market. He will not be able to sever the link with this curse.
When you drink water, you don't risk having a dry throat. He drinks water in spite of himself.
They drank and their eyes started to redden so much.
They arrived and threatened the prisoners.
The death of my father Gife.
Nothing pleases him anymore.
during the day, he only complains
Up to the front, He's finished with him.
Then they started to dance like crazy.
Directly this triggered problems in their midst.
another from Dschang saw this and called the prison guards.
Get up in haste, and let's go study the writings.
If it gets lost, let no one consciously participate in it.
So our world must get lost in our hands!
And those who received us were also so dark;
The patriots used the earth to make medium cooking pots, large cooking pots, Teng, small cooking pots, large small cooking pots, statues and pipes.
When peace reigns in the group, the song of peace is sung, and the nation participates by responding Yayakam (peace / glory)
They had drunk so much, and yelled at them, since they were so drunk that they walked unbalanced.
In addition, we supported them to return step by step, before this affair which was to last, or saved prisoners.
In town, some neighbors do not greet each other because of land matters.
We hear that he is banging the ground like this:
It's been two weeks since my father left his house.
What must we do ? Where should we take him now?
He spends his time lying down, from morning to night.
Greed is not appreciable.
Than the one who shared.
We share before God adds.
If you help the poor, then it is God that you are helping.
This is what emerges from the ridge and the furrow at the same time, which is beneficial.
If you have anything, think about those who don't.
Someone's brother isn't just the one out of the same womb as him.
He whose hand is scattered like taro leaves is very happy.
My father Gife do the '' ok '' of death; he closed his eyes.
‘‘ Hm! Hm! Thirst killed me, I died of thirst, Bring me water ''
Some women leave the country, and conceive, you will understand that they want us to go to the village and give their share of the land so that they consume it.
Land is not measurable: if we go to court for ten cases, if you look closely, you will see that eight of them will concern land issues.
It is a shame to talk about the other's and to devalue one's own. [Mother tongue is precious, mother tongue is a treasure, let's learn and bring others to learn.
Beware of selling the land and going elsewhere to ask for a place to stay. Let no one give his head for the price of a plot of land, otherwise he will quickly return to the ground.
He will receive, will withdraw to share, to give, to help the whole village; his heart rejoices, and softens.
The one who is as gentle as taro will be loved by all, so that even the one who has no teeth will also benefit from him.
When someone's hand stretches out, and looks upward like makabo leaves, let him know that this wealth is not his at all.
The compatriots love their place of origin, to the point of exile, gave birth elsewhere and send the umbilical cord of the child, which one so that one buries where they were born.
It was so, before we started to think again about this case which was to last, since the prison guards had brought the prisoners back to prison.
The situation has worsened: my father Gife is not breathing well. He breathes in sections.
People console themselves saying: "what mourning! Without consolation; this mourning has no shame?
Have you seen the number of children that Gife has to leave? Who will be left to take care of them? Yes, no problem; But such an exaggerated affair like this? My father Gife, come on.
When we bring him water, he lifts up slightly and drinks, Then we can still hear him say: hm! Hm! It threatens him and he throws up everything, then becomes quite tired and bends down to lie on the bed.
The master of protocol who takes care of the notable future. Just like the king being still a small notable in La'kam, when one speaks to him about an affair, he is silent; When we dig deeper by questioning it, it remains like a still object.
His brothers also seek to name their children, the Tchuenkam, Feukam, Takam, mokam, as well as the Pekam. Being wary that they are not taken for opponents of royal notability; just as one cannot consider notability while taking it for derisory.
If he is overwhelmed by any thought, he will speak with reserve, watching just as he will come to judge righteously, striving to receive his share of notability gain. He desires, that by leaving the La'kam that God will have granted him; If a girl is born, she will be named Thukam; If it will be a man, we will call him Pouokam. When God has heard him, everything will be peaceful; The nation understanding thus, begins to do the Kam dance.
Should we receive and keep behind? If it's all for you alone, know that a day will come when your flavor will itch to the point where even the pork will refuse to eat it.
Isn't it a big deal that a food scratches so well that the pig refuses it? Between the taro leaves and those of makabo, what do you choose? In our language, we say that when there is mutual aid in the village, no one will experience poverty.
Since many have undertaken to write an account of the things which are received among us with full certainty,
as they imparted to us who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word,
it seemed good to me too, who have followed everything exactly from the beginning, very excellent Théophile, to write [them] to you in order,
so that you may know the certainty of the things of which you have been instructed.
In the days of Herod king of Judea, there was a certain priest named Zacharias of the class of Abia; and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and in all the ordinances of the Lord without reproach.
And they had no children, because Elizabeth was barren; and they were both very advanced in years.
Now it came to pass, while he was exercising the priesthood before God in the order of his class,
that, according to the custom of the priesthood, lot fell to him to offer the incense on entering the temple * of * the Lord.
And all the multitude of the people were praying outside in the hour of incense.
And an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.
And Zechariah seeing him was troubled, and fear seized him.
And the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias, for thy supplications have been heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.
And he will be a joy and gladness to you, and many will rejoice at his birth;
And he will cause many of the sons of Israel to return to the Lord their God.
And he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of fathers to children, and the disobedient to * the mind of the righteous, to prepare a willing people for * the Lord.
And Zechariah said to the angel, How shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife is very advanced in years.
And the angel, answering, said to him: I am Gabriel, who stand before God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.
And behold, you will be dumb, and you will not be able to speak until the day that these things take place, because you did not believe my words which will be fulfilled in their time.
And the people were waiting for Zechariah; and they wondered that it was so long in the temple. *
And when he was out, he could not speak to them: and they recognized that he had seen a vision in the temple *; and he himself made signs to them, and he was silent.
And it came to pass that when the days of his ministry were finished, he did go to his house.
Now after these days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying:
The Lord did so to me in the days that he looked at me, to take away my reproach among men.
And in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent by God to a city in Galilee called Nazareth,
to a virgin, betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.
And the angel coming in to her, said: Hail, you whom [God] grants to enjoy his favor! The Lord is with you; you are blessed among women.
And she, seeing him, was troubled at his word; and she was reasoning to herself about what this greeting might be.
And the angel said to her, Fear not, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
And Zechariah his father was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying:
Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited and saved * his people.
and raised up for us a horn of deliverance in the house of David his servant.
as he had said through the mouths of his holy prophets, who have been from all time,
a deliverance from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us;
to show mercy to our fathers and to remember his holy covenant,
of the oath he swore to Abraham our father,
to grant us, being freed * from the hand of our enemies, to serve him without fear,
in holiness and in righteousness before him, all our days.
And you, little child, will be called the prophet of the Most High: for you will go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.
to give knowledge of salvation * to his people, in the remission of their sins!
And they said unto him, There is none in thy kindred who is called by this name.
And they motioned to his father [to declare] what he wanted him to be called.
And having asked for tablets, he wrote, saying, John is his name.
And they were all astonished. And instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue [loosed]; and he was speaking, praising God.
And all their neighbors were seized with fear; and all these things were talked about throughout all the highland land of Judaea;
and all that heard them put them in their hearts, saying, What then will this child be? And the hand of the Lord was with him.
And Mary remained with her about three months; and she returned to her house.
Now the time for her to give birth was fulfilled for Elizabeth, and she gave birth to a son.
And her neighbors and her parents heard that the * Lord had magnified his mercy towards her, and they rejoiced with her.
And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the little child; and they called him Zechariah, after his father's name.
And his mother, answering, said: No, but he will be called John.
and my spirit rejoiced in God my Savior.
for the Almighty has done great things to me, and his name is holy;
and his mercy is from generation to generation on those who fear him.
He acted mightily by his arm; he has scattered the proud in the minds of their hearts;
he has brought down the mighty from their thrones, and he has exalted the little ones;
he has filled those who were hungry with good things, and he has sent the rich away empty;
he took up the cause of Israel, his servant, to remember his mercy.
as he spoke to our fathers toward Abraham and toward his seed forever.
And behold, you shall conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son, and you shall call his name Jesus.
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High; and the * Lord God ** will give him the throne of his father David;
and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever, * and there will be no end to his kingdom.
And Mary said to the angel: How will this happen, since I do not know a man?
And the angel answering said to him, The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore also the holy thing that will be born will be called the Son of God.
And behold, your relative Elizabeth, she also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren;
for nothing will be impossible with God.
And Mary said: Behold the servant of the Lord; be it done to me according to your word. And the angel withdrew from her.
And Mary rising up in those days, went in haste to the land of the mountains, to a city of Judah.
And she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
And it came to pass, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, that the little child quivered in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
and she cried out with a loud voice and said: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb !.
And where does this come from, may the mother of my Lord come to me ?.
And blessed is she who believed; for there will be a fulfillment of the things which were spoken to him from the Lord.
And Mary said: My soul magnifies the Lord,
And all were going to be registered, each in their own city.
And Joseph also went up out of Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, in Judea, into the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and the family of David.
to be registered with Mary, the woman who was engaged to him, who was pregnant.
And it came to pass, while they were there, that the days of her having to give birth came to pass.
and she gave birth to her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in the manger, because there was no room for them in the inn
And there were shepherds in the same country who dwell in the field, and watch their flocks during the night watches.
And, behold, an angel of the Lord was found with them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them; and they were seized with great fear.
And the angel said unto them, Be not afraid; for, behold, I proclaim to you a great cause for joy * which shall be for all the people;
for today in the city of David a Savior is born to you, who is Christ the Lord.
And this is the sign for you, is that you will find a little child swaddled and lying in a manger.
And suddenly there was a multitude of the heavenly host with the angel, praising God, and saying:
Glory to God in the very high places; and on earth, peace; and good pleasure in men!
And it came to pass, when the angels had gone with them into heaven, that the shepherds said among themselves, Let us go therefore to Bethlehem, and let us see this thing which has happened which the Lord has made known to us.
And they went in haste, and they found Mary and Joseph, and the little child lying in the manger.
And having seen it, they disclosed the * word which had been spoken to them concerning this little child.
And all who heard him marveled at the things which were said to them by the shepherds.
And Marie kept all these things with her, going over them in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all things which they had heard and seen, as it had been told to them.
And when eight days were completed to circumcise him, his name was called Jesus, whose name he had been called by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord.
(as it is written in the law of the * Lord, that every male who opens the womb will be called a saint to the * Lord) *,
and to offer a sacrifice, as prescribed in the law of * the Lord, a pair of doves or two young doves *.
And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon; and this man was righteous and pious, and he waited for the consolation of Israel; and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
And he had been divinely warned by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death, unless he had first seen the Christ of the Lord.
And he came by the Spirit into the temple; and as the parents brought the baby Jesus to do with him according to the use of the law.
he took him in his arms and blessed God and said:
Now, Lord, you let your slave go in peace according to your word;
for my eyes have seen your salvation.
which thou hast prepared before the presence of all peoples.
a light for the revelation of the nations, and the glory of your people Israel.
And his father and mother marveled at the things that were said about him.
And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother, Behold, this is set for the downfall and the raising up of many in Israel, and for a sign which will be contradicted.
(and even a sword will pierce your own soul), so that the thoughts of many hearts are revealed.
And there was Anne, a prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser (she was very advanced in years, having lived with a husband seven years since her virginity,
and widow of about * eighty-four years), who never left the temple, serving [God] in fasting and prayer, night and day;
the latter, occurring at this very moment, praised the * Lord, and spoke of him to all those in Jerusalem who awaited deliverance *.
And when they had accomplished all according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their city Nazareth.
And the child grew and grew strong, being filled with wisdom; and the favor of God was upon him.
And his parents went to Jerusalem every year for the Passover feast.
And when he was twelve years old, as they had gone up to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast.
and when they had fulfilled the days [of the feast], when they were returning, the infant Jesus remained in Jerusalem; and his parents did not know it.
But believing that he was in the troop of travelers, they walked the way one day and sought him among their relatives and acquaintances;
and not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem to seek him.
And it came to pass that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting among the doctors, listening to them and asking them questions.
And everyone who heard him was amazed at his intelligence and his responses.
And when they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said unto him, My child, why hast thou done thus to us? Behold, your father and I were looking for you, being in great trouble.
And he said to them, Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father's business?
And they did not understand the word he was saying to them.
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them. And her mother kept all these words in her heart.
And Jesus advanced in wisdom and in stature, and in favor with God and men.
Now, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and of the country of Trachonite, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene ,
under the high priesthood of Anna and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zechariah, in the wilderness.
And he went into all the land around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins;
as it is written in the book of words of Isaiah the prophet, Voice of him crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
Every valley will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be made low, and the turtle things will be made straight, and the rough [paths] will become united paths;
and all flesh will see the salvation of God
He said therefore to the crowds which went out to be baptized by him, You race of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath that is coming?
Therefore bear fruit which is suitable for repentance; and do not begin to say to yourselves: We have Abraham for our father; for I tell you that God can raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
And already even the ax is put at the root of the trees; every tree therefore which does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
And the crowds asked him, saying, What then must we do?
And he answered and said unto them, Whoever hath two coats, let him give them unto him that hath none, and let him that hath provision likewise.
And tax collectors also came to be baptized; and they said to him, Teacher, what must we do?
And he said to them, Do not perceive anything beyond what is commanded to you.
And men of war also questioned him, saying: And we, what must we do? And he said to them, Do not commit extortions, neither accuse anyone deceitfully, and be content with your wages.
And as the people were waiting, and all were reasoning in their hearts about John if he was not the Christ,
John answered all, saying: I baptize you with water; but he who is more powerful than I is coming, from whom I am not worthy to untie the strap of the sandals: he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.
He has his van in his hand, and he will completely clean his threshing floor and assemble the wheat in his attic, but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.
And also making many other exhortations, he therefore evangelized the people;
Yeso and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form, like a dove; and there was a voice from heaven: You are my beloved Son; in you I found my pleasure.
And it came to pass that as all the people were baptized, Jesus also being baptized and praying, heaven was opened;
but Herod the Tetrarch, being reproved by him concerning Herodias his brother's wife, and because of all the wicked things Herod had done,
added to all the others that of putting John in prison.
of Matthat, of Levi, of Melchi, of Janna, of Joseph,
And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old, * being, as was estimated, the son of Joseph: of Eli,
of Mattathie, of Amos, of Nahum, of Esli, of Naggé,
of Maath, of Mattathie, of Semei, of Joseph, of Judah,
of Johanna, of Rhesa, of Zerubbabel, of Salathiel, of Neri,
of Melchi, of Addi, of Cosam, of Elmodam, of Er,
of José, of Eliezer, of Jorim, of Matthat, of Levi,
of Simeon, of Judah, of Joseph, of Jonan, of Eliakim,
of Mélea, of Maïnan, of Mattatha, of Nathan, of David,
of Jesse, Obed, Boaz, Salmon, Naasson,
of Aminadab, of Aram, of Esrom, of Phares, of Judah,
of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham, of Thara, of Nachor
of Seruch, of Ragaü, of Phalek, of Eber, of Sala,
of Cainan, of Arphaxad, of Shem, of Noah, of Lamech,
of Mathusala, of Enoch, of Jared, of Maleleel, of Cainan,
of Enos, of Seth, of Adam, of God.
And Jesus answered him, saying: It is written that "a man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God"
And the devil, leading him to a high mountain, showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth.
And the devil said unto him, I will give thee all this authority and the glory of these kingdoms; for it has been given to me, and I give it to whomever I want.
So if you bow down to me, it will be all yours.
And Jesus, answering him, said: It is written: "You will give homage to the Lord your God, and you will serve him alone"
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on the top of the temple, and said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, throw thyself down from here;
for it is written: “He will give orders to his angels concerning you, to keep you;
and they will carry you on their hands, lest you strike your foot against a stone ”
And Jesus, answering, said to him: It is said: "You shall not tempt the Lord your God"
And having fulfilled all temptation, the devil withdrew with him for a time.
And Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit; and his fame spread throughout the surrounding country.
And he himself taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
"The Spirit of * the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news * to the poor; he sent me to proclaim deliverance * to captives, and to the blind the recovery of sight; to send free those who are trodden down, and to proclaim the pleasing year of the Lord "
And having folded up the book, and having returned it to him who was on duty, * he sat down; and the eyes of all who were in the synagogue were fixed on him.
And he began to say to them, This writing is fulfilled today, you hearing it.
And all bore witness to him, and marveled at the words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth, and said, Is not this the son of Joseph?
And he said unto them, Surely ye shall tell me this parable: Physician, heal thyself; do here also in your country all the things that we have heard that were done in Capernaum.
And he said, Verily I say to you, that no prophet has been received into his land.
And, verily, I say to you, that there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when heaven was closed three years and six months, so that there was a great famine throughout the land.
and Elijah was not sent to any of them, except to Zarephath of Sidonia to a widowed woman.
And there were many lepers in Israel in the days of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was made clean except Naaman the Syrian.
And they were all filled with anger in the synagogue when they heard these things;
and getting up, they drove him out of the city, and brought him to the steep edge of the mountain on which their city was built, so as to throw it down.
But he, passing through them, went away.
And he went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath day.
And they wondered at his doctrine, because his word was with authority.
And there was a man in the synagogue with the spirit of a foul demon; and he cried aloud,
saying: Ha! what is it between us and you, Jesus Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you, who you are: the Saint of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be quiet, and come out of him. And the devil, having thrown him into the midst of all, came out of him without doing him any harm.
And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying, What word is this? for with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they go out.
And his fame spread to all the places around.
And getting up, [he came out] of the synagogue and entered Simon's house. And Simon’s mother-in-law had a high fever, and they prayed for her.
And leaning over her, he rebuked the fever, and [the fever] left her; and immediately having risen, she served them.
Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness.
being tempted by the devil forty days. And he ate nothing during those days; and when they were finished he was hungry.
And the devil said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, say unto this stone that it become bread.
And he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up; and he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, as was his custom, and rose to read.
And they gave him the book of the prophet Isaiah; and having unfolded the book, he found the passage in which it was written:
And as the sun was going down, all those who had cripples with various diseases brought them to him; and having laid his hands on each of them, he healed them.
And the demons also came out from many, crying and saying: You are the Son of God. And, scolding them, he would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the Christ.
And when it was day he went out and went into a desert place; and the crowds were looking for him and came to him; and they restrained him, that he should not go away from them.
But he said to them, I must proclaim the kingdom of God also to the other cities; because I was sent for it.
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.
Now it came to pass, as the crowds were throwing themselves upon him to hear the word of God, that he was standing on the shore of the lake of Gennesaret.
And he saw two pods that were by the lake. Now the fishermen had come down and were washing their nets.
And getting into one of the boats that was Simon's, he begged him to get off the ground a little; and, sitting down, he was teaching the crowds from above the basket.
And when he had ceased speaking, he said to Simon, Lead into the water, and let go of your nets to fish.
And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have worked all night, and have taken nothing; but at your word I will let go of the net.
And having done this, they locked up a great number of fish, and their net broke.
And they motioned to their companions who were in the other basket to come and help them; and they came and filled the two boats, so that they sank.
And Simon Peter, seeing this, fell on Jesus' knees, saying, Lord, depart from me, for I am a sinful man.
For he was seized with fear, and all who were with him, because of the catch of fish which they had just taken;
as also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners of Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not; henceforth you will take men.
And having brought the pods to land, they left everything and followed him.
And it came to pass, as he was in one of the cities, that behold a man full of leprosy; and seeing Jesus, he fell on his face and begged him, saying: Lord, if you will, you can make me clean.
And stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: I will, be clear. And immediately the leprosy withdrew from him.
And he commanded him not to tell anyone: but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing, as Moses commanded, * that it may be a witness to them.
And his fame spread more and more; and great crowds gathered to hear him and to be healed of their infirmities;
but he kept himself in the desert and prayed.
And it came to pass, one of these days *, that he was teaching. And Pharisees and teachers of the law, who had come from every town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem, were sitting [there], and the power of the Lord was [there] to heal them.
And here are some men carrying on a bed a man who was paralyzed; and they sought to bring him in and set him before him.
And not finding by what means they could introduce him, because of the crowd, they went up to the roof and lowered him by the tiles, with his little bed, in the middle, in front of Jesus.
And seeing their faith, he said, Man, your sins are forgiven you.
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, except God alone?
And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, answering, said to them, Why are you reasoning in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say: Your sins are forgiven, or to say: Get up and walk ?.
Now, that you may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins (he said to the paralytic): I say to you, get up, and, taking up your cot, go into your house.
And immediately, having risen before them, he picked up [the bed] on which he was lying, and went to his house, glorifying God.
And they were all amazed, and glorified God; and they were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things this day.
And after that he went out; and he saw a tax collector * named Levi, sitting at the collecting office, and he said to him, Follow me.
And leaving everything, he got up and followed him.
And Levi made him a great feast in his house; and there was a great crowd of tax collectors and other people who were with them at the table.
And their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying: Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors * and sinners?
And Jesus answering said to them, Those who are healthy do not need a doctor, but those who are ill.
I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John often fast and say prayers, likewise also those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink?
And he said to them: Can you make the sons of the bridal chamber * fast while the bridegroom is with them?
But the days will come when also the bridegroom will be taken away from them; then they will fast in those days.
And he also told them a parable: No one puts a piece of a new garment on an old garment; otherwise it will tear up the new one, and also the new part [taken] will not match the old one.
And no one puts new wine in old wineskins; otherwise the new wine will break the wineskins, and it will be spilled, and the wineskins will be lost;
but the new wine must be put in new wineskins, and both are preserved.
And there is no one who has drunk old, who immediately wants new; for he says: The old man is better.
Now it came to pass on the second-first Sabbath that He was passing through the corn; and his disciples plucked up the ears of corn and ate them, crushing them in their hands.
And some of the Pharisees said to them, Why do you do what it is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day?
And Jesus answering said unto them, Have you not even read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him;
how he entered into the house of God, and took the shewbread, and ate thereof, and endowed also those who were with him, though it was not lawful to eat thereof, except to the priests alone?
And he said to them, The son of man is also lord of the sabbath.
And it also came to pass, on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and was teaching. And there was a man there, and his right hand was withered.
And the scribes and the Pharisees were observing whether he would be healed on a sabbath day, that they would find something to accuse him of.
And he knew their thoughts and said to the man who had the withered hand, Arise, and stand there before all. And getting up, he stood there.
Jesus therefore said to them, I will ask you whether it is lawful on the Sabbath day to do good or to do evil, to save life or to lose it?
And having looked around at them all, he said to him, Stretch out thy hand. And he did so; and his hand was made [healthy] like the other.
Blessed are you who are hungry now, for you will be satisfied; Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when men hate you, and when they cut you off [from their society], and insult you and reject your name as bad, because of the son of man.
Rejoice in that day and be trembling for joy, for, behold, great is your reward in heaven, for their fathers did so also unto the prophets.
But woe to you rich, for you have your consolation;
woe to you who are full, for you will be hungry; woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same to false prophets.
Jude [brother] of James, and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor;
and going down with them, he stopped in a united place, and the multitude of his disciples, and a great multitude of people from all Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea region of Tire and Sidon, who had come to hear it and to be healed of their diseases;
those also who were tormented by foul spirits were healed.
and all the multitude sought to touch him, for power came out from him, and she healed them all.
And he, lifting up his eyes to his disciples, said, Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God;
And when the day was come, he called his disciples. And having chosen twelve of them, whom he also named apostles:
Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his brother; Jacques and Jean; Philippe and Barthélemy;
Matthew and Thomas; James the [son] of Alpheus, and Simon who was called a Zealot;
And they in themselves were outside themselves, and were discussing together what they could do to Jesus.
it happened in those days that he did go to a mountain to pray. And he spent the whole night praying to God.
But to you who listen, I say to you: Love your enemies; do good to those who hate you;
bless those who curse you; pray for those who harm you.
To the one who hits you on one cheek, turn the other too; and if someone takes your coat off, don't stop them [from] your tunic too.
Give to every man who asks you, and to him who takes away what is yours, do not ask for it again.
And as you want men to do to you, so do you too.
And if you love those who love you, how grateful will you be? for sinners also love those who love them.
And if you do good to those who do you good, how grateful will you be? for sinners do likewise.
And if you lend to those from whom you hope to receive, how grateful will you be? for sinners also lend to sinners, that they may receive the same.
But love your enemies, and do good, and lend without expecting anything; and your reward will be great, and you will be the children of the Most High; for he is good to the ungrateful and the wicked.
Be therefore merciful, as also your Father is merciful;
and judge not, and you will not be judged; do not condemn, and you will not be condemned; acquit, and you will be acquitted;
give, and it shall be given to you: good measure, pressed and shaken together, it shall be given to you in the womb, and it shall overflow; for of the same measure which you will measure, it will be measured back to you.
And he also told them a parable: Can a blind lead the blind? will they not both fall into the pit?
The disciple is not above his master, but every accomplished man will be like his master.
I will show you who is like everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them:
he is like a man who builds a house, who digs and dug deeply, and put a foundation on the rock: but a flood having come, the river rushed violently against this house, and he did not could shake it, for it had been founded on rock.
But he who heard and did not put into practice is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation; and the river fell upon her with violence, and immediately she fell; and the ruin of this house was great.
And the slave of a certain centurion, to whom he was very dear, was ill and was going to die.
And having heard of Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, begging him to come and save * his slave.
And having come to Jesus, they prayed to him earnestly, saying: It is worthy that you grant this to him.
for he loves our nation and has built the synagogue himself.
And Jesus went with them. And already, as he was no longer far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him: Lord, do not weary yourself, for I am not worthy that you enter under my roof;
that’s why I didn’t believe myself worthy of coming to you either; but speak a word * and my servant will be healed.
and when he had finished all his speeches, when the people heard him, he entered Capernaum.
for each tree is known by its own fruit, for figs are not gathered from thorns, nor grapes from a bush are gathered.
The good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, produces what is good, and the evil man produces what is bad: for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.
And why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not what I say?
For there is no good tree that brings forth bad fruit, neither is there a bad tree that brings forth good fruit.
Or how can you tell your brother, Brother, allow me, I will remove the wisp that's in your eye, you who can't see the beam that's in your eye? Hypocrite, first remove the beam from your eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the stub that is in your brother's eye.
For there is no good tree that brings forth bad fruit, neither is a bad tree that brings forth good fruit;
The good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, produces what is good, and the evil man produces what is bad: for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.
And why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not what I say?
I will show you who is like everyone who comes to me and hears my words and does them:
he is like a man who builds a house, who digs and dug deeply, and put a foundation on the rock: but a flood having come, the river rushed violently against this house, and he did not could shake it, for it had been founded on rock.
But he who heard and did not put into practice is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation; and the river fell upon her with violence, and immediately she fell; and the ruin of this house was great.
And when he had finished all his speeches, when the people heard him, he entered Capernaum.
And the slave of a certain centurion, to whom he was very dear, was ill and was going to die.
And having heard of Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, begging him to come and save * his slave.
And having come to Jesus, they prayed to him earnestly, saying: It is worthy that you grant this to him.
for he loves our nation and has built the synagogue himself.
And Jesus went with them. And already, as he was no longer far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him: Lord, do not weary yourself, for I am not worthy that you enter under my roof;
that’s why I didn’t believe myself worthy of coming to you either; but speak a word * and my servant will be healed.
For I too am a man under the authority [of others], having soldiers under me; and I say to one: Go, and he goes; and to another: Come, and they will be; and to my slave: Do this, and he does it.
And Jesus, having heard these things, admired him; and turning to the crowd that followed him, he said, I tell you that I have not found such great faith even in Israel.
And those who had been sent, having returned home, found the slave sick well.
And the next day * it came to pass that [Jesus] was going to a city called Nain, and many of his disciples and a great crowd were going with him.
And as he drew near to the city gate, behold, they were carrying outside a dead man, his mother's only son, and she was a widow; and a considerable crowd of the city was with her.
And the Lord, seeing her, was moved with compassion towards her, and said to her, Weep not.
And coming closer, he touched the beer; and those who carried it stopped; and he says :
Young man, I tell you, get up. And the dead man arose from his seat, and began to speak; and he gave it to his mother.
And they were all fearful, and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet has been raised up among us, and God has visited his people.
And a report of this fact * spread about him throughout all Judea and all the country round about.
And the disciples of John told him all these things.
And having called two of his disciples, John sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he who is coming?
And the men came to him, and said, John the Baptizer has sent us to you, saying, Art thou he who is coming, or should we expect another?
(In that hour he healed many people of diseases and plagues and evil spirits, and he gave sight to many who were blind).
And Jesus answering said unto them, Go, and tell John the things which ye have seen and heard: that the blind receive their sight, that the lame walk, that the lepers are cleansed, that the deaf hear, that the dead rise again, and that the gospel * is preached to the poor.
And blessed is anyone who will not have been scandalized in me.
And when John's messengers were gone, he began to say of John to the crowds: What did you go out to see in the desert? A reed stirred by the wind?
But what did you go to see? A man dressed in precious clothes? Behold, those beautifully dressed and living in delicacies are in the palaces of kings.
And they motioned to his father [to declare] what he wanted him to be called.
And having asked for tablets, he wrote, saying, John is his name.
And they were all astonished. And instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue [loosed]; and he was speaking, praising God.
And all their neighbors were seized with fear; and all these things were talked about throughout all the highland land of Judaea;
and all that heard them put them in their hearts, saying, What then will this child be? And the hand of the Lord was with him.
And Mary remained with her about three months; and she returned to her house.
Now the time for her to give birth was fulfilled for Elizabeth, and she gave birth to a son.
And her neighbors and her parents heard that the * Lord had magnified his mercy towards her, and they rejoiced with her.
And it came to pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the little child; and they called him Zechariah, after his father's name.
And his mother, answering, said: No, but he will be called John.
and my spirit rejoiced in God my Savior.
for the Almighty has done great things to me, and his name is holy;
and his mercy is from generation to generation on those who fear him.
He acted mightily by his arm; he has scattered the proud in the minds of their hearts;
he has brought down the mighty from their thrones, and he has exalted the little ones;
he has filled those who were hungry with good things, and he has sent the rich away empty;
he took up the cause of Israel, his servant, to remember his mercy.
as he spoke to our fathers toward Abraham and toward his seed forever.
And behold, you shall conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son, and you shall call his name Jesus.
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High; and the * Lord God ** will give him the throne of his father David;
and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever, * and there will be no end to his kingdom.
And Mary said to the angel: How will this happen, since I do not know a man?
And the angel answering said to him, The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore also the holy thing that will be born will be called the Son of God.
And behold, your relative Elizabeth, she also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren;
for nothing will be impossible with God.
And Mary said: Behold the servant of the Lord; be it done to me according to your word. And the angel withdrew from her.
And Mary rising up in those days, went in haste to the land of the mountains, to a city of Judah.
And she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
And it came to pass, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, that the little child quivered in her womb; and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
and she cried out with a loud voice and said: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb !.
And where does this come from, may the mother of my Lord come to me ?.
And blessed is she who believed; for there will be a fulfillment of the things which were spoken to him from the Lord.
And Mary said: My soul magnifies the Lord,
And all were going to be registered, each in their own city.
And Joseph also went up out of Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, in Judea, into the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and the family of David.
to be registered with Mary, the woman who was engaged to him, who was pregnant.
And it came to pass, while they were there, that the days of her having to give birth came to pass.
and she gave birth to her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in the manger, because there was no room for them in the inn
And there were shepherds in the same country who dwell in the field, and watch their flocks during the night watches.
And, behold, an angel of the Lord was found with them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them; and they were seized with great fear.
And the angel said unto them, Be not afraid; for, behold, I proclaim to you a great cause for joy * which shall be for all the people;
for today in the city of David a Savior is born to you, who is Christ the Lord.
And this is the sign for you, is that you will find a little child swaddled and lying in a manger.
And suddenly there was a multitude of the heavenly host with the angel, praising God, and saying:
Glory to God in the very high places; and on earth, peace; and good pleasure in men!
And it came to pass, when the angels had gone with them into heaven, that the shepherds said among themselves, Let us go therefore to Bethlehem, and let us see this thing which has happened which the Lord has made known to us.
And they went in haste, and they found Mary and Joseph, and the little child lying in the manger.
And having seen it, they disclosed the * word which had been spoken to them concerning this little child.
And all who heard him marveled at the things which were said to them by the shepherds.
And Marie kept all these things with her, going over them in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all things which they had heard and seen, as it had been told to them.
And when eight days were completed to circumcise him, his name was called Jesus, whose name he had been called by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord.
(as it is written in the law of the * Lord, that every male who opens the womb will be called a saint to the * Lord) *,
and to offer a sacrifice, as prescribed in the law of * the Lord, a pair of doves or two young doves *.
And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon; and this man was righteous and pious, and he waited for the consolation of Israel; and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
And he had been divinely warned by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death, unless he had first seen the Christ of the Lord.
And he came by the Spirit into the temple; and as the parents brought the baby Jesus to do with him according to the use of the law.
he took him in his arms and blessed God and said:
Now, Lord, you let your slave go in peace according to your word;
for my eyes have seen your salvation.
which thou hast prepared before the presence of all peoples.
a light for the revelation of the nations, and the glory of your people Israel.
And his father and mother marveled at the things that were said about him.
And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother, Behold, this is set for the downfall and the raising up of many in Israel, and for a sign which will be contradicted.
(and even a sword will pierce your own soul), so that the thoughts of many hearts are revealed.
And there was Anne, a prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser (she was very advanced in years, having lived with a husband seven years since her virginity,
and widow of about * eighty-four years), who never left the temple, serving [God] in fasting and prayer, night and day;
the latter, occurring at this very moment, praised the * Lord, and spoke of him to all those in Jerusalem who awaited deliverance *.
And when they had accomplished all according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their city Nazareth.
And the child grew and grew strong, being filled with wisdom; and the favor of God was upon him.
And his parents went to Jerusalem every year for the Passover feast.
And when he was twelve years old, as they had gone up to Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast.
and when they had fulfilled the days [of the feast], when they were returning, the infant Jesus remained in Jerusalem; and his parents did not know it.
But believing that he was in the troop of travelers, they walked the way one day and sought him among their relatives and acquaintances;
and not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem to seek him.
And it came to pass that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting among the doctors, listening to them and asking them questions.
And everyone who heard him was amazed at his intelligence and his responses.
And when they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said unto him, My child, why hast thou done thus to us? Behold, your father and I were looking for you, being in great trouble.
And he said to them, Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be in my Father's business?
And they did not understand the word he was saying to them.
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them. And her mother kept all these words in her heart.
And Jesus advanced in wisdom and in stature, and in favor with God and men.
Now, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and of the country of Trachonite, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene ,
under the high priesthood of Anna and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zechariah, in the wilderness.
And he went into all the land around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins;
as it is written in the book of words of Isaiah the prophet, Voice of him crying in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
Every valley will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be made low, and the turtle things will be made straight, and the rough [paths] will become united paths;
and all flesh will see the salvation of God
He said therefore to the crowds which went out to be baptized by him, You race of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath that is coming?
Therefore bear fruit which is suitable for repentance; and do not begin to say to yourselves: We have Abraham for our father; for I tell you that God can raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
And already even the ax is put at the root of the trees; every tree therefore which does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
And the crowds asked him, saying, What then must we do?
And he answered and said unto them, Whoever hath two coats, let him give them unto him that hath none, and let him that hath provision likewise.
And tax collectors also came to be baptized; and they said to him, Teacher, what must we do?
And he said to them, Do not perceive anything beyond what is commanded to you.
And men of war also questioned him, saying: And we, what must we do? And he said to them, Do not commit extortions, neither accuse anyone deceitfully, and be content with your wages.
And as the people were waiting, and all were reasoning in their hearts about John if he was not the Christ,
John answered all, saying: I baptize you with water; but he who is more powerful than I is coming, from whom I am not worthy to untie the strap of the sandals: he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.
He has his van in his hand, and he will completely clean his threshing floor and assemble the wheat in his attic, but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.
And also making many other exhortations, he therefore evangelized the people;
Yeso and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form, like a dove; and there was a voice from heaven: You are my beloved Son; in you I found my pleasure.
And it came to pass that as all the people were baptized, Jesus also being baptized and praying, heaven was opened;
but Herod the Tetrarch, being reproved by him concerning Herodias his brother's wife, and because of all the wicked things Herod had done,
added to all the others that of putting John in prison.
of Matthat, of Levi, of Melchi, of Janna, of Joseph,
And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old, * being, as was estimated, the son of Joseph: of Eli,
of Mattathie, of Amos, of Nahum, of Esli, of Naggé,
of Maath, of Mattathie, of Semei, of Joseph, of Judah,
of Johanna, of Rhesa, of Zerubbabel, of Salathiel, of Neri,
of Melchi, of Addi, of Cosam, of Elmodam, of Er,
of José, of Eliezer, of Jorim, of Matthat, of Levi,
of Simeon, of Judah, of Joseph, of Jonan, of Eliakim,
of Mélea, of Maïnan, of Mattatha, of Nathan, of David,
of Jesse, Obed, Boaz, Salmon, Naasson,
of Aminadab, of Aram, of Esrom, of Phares, of Judah,
of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham, of Thara, of Nachor
of Seruch, of Ragaü, of Phalek, of Eber, of Sala,
of Cainan, of Arphaxad, of Shem, of Noah, of Lamech,
of Mathusala, of Enoch, of Jared, of Maleleel, of Cainan,
of Enos, of Seth, of Adam, of God.
And Jesus answered him, saying: It is written that "a man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God"
And the devil, leading him to a high mountain, showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth.
And the devil said unto him, I will give thee all this authority and the glory of these kingdoms; for it has been given to me, and I give it to whomever I want.
So if you bow down to me, it will be all yours.
And Jesus, answering him, said: It is written: "You will give homage to the Lord your God, and you will serve him alone"
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on the top of the temple, and said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, throw thyself down from here;
for it is written: “He will give orders to his angels concerning you, to keep you;
and they will carry you on their hands, lest you strike your foot against a stone ”
And Jesus, answering, said to him: It is said: "You shall not tempt the Lord your God"
And having fulfilled all temptation, the devil withdrew with him for a time.
And Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit; and his fame spread throughout the surrounding country.
And he himself taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
"The Spirit of * the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news * to the poor; he sent me to proclaim deliverance * to captives, and to the blind the recovery of sight; to send free those who are trodden down, and to proclaim the pleasing year of the Lord "
And having folded up the book, and having returned it to him who was on duty, * he sat down; and the eyes of all who were in the synagogue were fixed on him.
And he began to say to them, This writing is fulfilled today, you hearing it.
And all bore witness to him, and marveled at the words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth, and said, Is not this the son of Joseph?
And he said unto them, Surely ye shall tell me this parable: Physician, heal thyself; do here also in your country all the things that we have heard that were done in Capernaum.
And he said, Verily I say to you, that no prophet has been received into his land.
And, verily, I say to you, that there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when heaven was closed three years and six months, so that there was a great famine throughout the land.
and Elijah was not sent to any of them, except to Zarephath of Sidonia to a widowed woman.
And there were many lepers in Israel in the days of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was made clean except Naaman the Syrian.
And they were all filled with anger in the synagogue when they heard these things;
and getting up, they drove him out of the city, and brought him to the steep edge of the mountain on which their city was built, so as to throw it down.
But he, passing through them, went away.
And he went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath day.
And they wondered at his doctrine, because his word was with authority.
And there was a man in the synagogue with the spirit of a foul demon; and he cried aloud,
saying: Ha! what is it between us and you, Jesus Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you, who you are: the Saint of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be quiet, and come out of him. And the devil, having thrown him into the midst of all, came out of him without doing him any harm.
And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying, What word is this? for with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they go out.
And his fame spread to all the places around.
And getting up, [he came out] of the synagogue and entered Simon's house. And Simon’s mother-in-law had a high fever, and they prayed for her.
And leaning over her, he rebuked the fever, and [the fever] left her; and immediately having risen, she served them.
Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness.
being tempted by the devil forty days. And he ate nothing during those days; and when they were finished he was hungry.
And the devil said unto him, If thou art the Son of God, say unto this stone that it become bread.
And he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up; and he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, as was his custom, and rose to read.
And they gave him the book of the prophet Isaiah; and having unfolded the book, he found the passage in which it was written:
And as the sun was going down, all those who had cripples with various diseases brought them to him; and having laid his hands on each of them, he healed them.
And the demons also came out from many, crying and saying: You are the Son of God. And, scolding them, he would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the Christ.
And when it was day he went out and went into a desert place; and the crowds were looking for him and came to him; and they restrained him, that he should not go away from them.
But he said to them, I must proclaim the kingdom of God also to the other cities; because I was sent for it.
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.
Now it came to pass, as the crowds were throwing themselves upon him to hear the word of God, that he was standing on the shore of the lake of Gennesaret.
And he saw two pods that were by the lake. Now the fishermen had come down and were washing their nets.
And getting into one of the boats that was Simon's, he begged him to get off the ground a little; and, sitting down, he was teaching the crowds from above the basket.
And when he had ceased speaking, he said to Simon, Lead into the water, and let go of your nets to fish.
And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have worked all night, and have taken nothing; but at your word I will let go of the net.
And having done this, they locked up a great number of fish, and their net broke.
And they motioned to their companions who were in the other basket to come and help them; and they came and filled the two boats, so that they sank.
And Simon Peter, seeing this, fell on Jesus' knees, saying, Lord, depart from me, for I am a sinful man.
For he was seized with fear, and all who were with him, because of the catch of fish which they had just taken;
as also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners of Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not; henceforth you will take men.
And having brought the pods to land, they left everything and followed him.
And it came to pass, as he was in one of the cities, that behold a man full of leprosy; and seeing Jesus, he fell on his face and begged him, saying: Lord, if you will, you can make me clean.
And stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: I will, be clear. And immediately the leprosy withdrew from him.
And he commanded him not to tell anyone: but go and show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing, as Moses commanded, * that it may be a witness to them.
And his fame spread more and more; and great crowds gathered to hear him and to be healed of their infirmities;
but he kept himself in the desert and prayed.
And it came to pass, one of these days *, that he was teaching. And Pharisees and teachers of the law, who had come from every town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem, were sitting [there], and the power of the Lord was [there] to heal them.
And here are some men carrying on a bed a man who was paralyzed; and they sought to bring him in and set him before him.
And not finding by what means they could introduce him, because of the crowd, they went up to the roof and lowered him by the tiles, with his little bed, in the middle, in front of Jesus.
And seeing their faith, he said, Man, your sins are forgiven you.
And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, except God alone?
And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, answering, said to them, Why are you reasoning in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say: Your sins are forgiven, or to say: Get up and walk ?.
Now, that you may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins (he said to the paralytic): I say to you, get up, and, taking up your cot, go into your house.
And immediately, having risen before them, he picked up [the bed] on which he was lying, and went to his house, glorifying God.
And they were all amazed, and glorified God; and they were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things this day.
And after that he went out; and he saw a tax collector * named Levi, sitting at the collecting office, and he said to him, Follow me.
And leaving everything, he got up and followed him.
And Levi made him a great feast in his house; and there was a great crowd of tax collectors and other people who were with them at the table.
And their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying: Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors * and sinners?
And Jesus answering said to them, Those who are healthy do not need a doctor, but those who are ill.
I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John often fast and say prayers, likewise also those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink?
And he said to them: Can you make the sons of the bridal chamber * fast while the bridegroom is with them?
But the days will come when also the bridegroom will be taken away from them; then they will fast in those days.
And he also told them a parable: No one puts a piece of a new garment on an old garment; otherwise it will tear up the new one, and also the new part [taken] will not match the old one.
And no one puts new wine in old wineskins; otherwise the new wine will break the wineskins, and it will be spilled, and the wineskins will be lost;
but the new wine must be put in new wineskins, and both are preserved.
And there is no one who has drunk old, who immediately wants new; for he says: The old man is better.
Now it came to pass on the second-first Sabbath that He was passing through the corn; and his disciples plucked up the ears of corn and ate them, crushing them in their hands.
And some of the Pharisees said to them, Why do you do what it is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day?
And Jesus answering said unto them, Have you not even read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him;
how he entered into the house of God, and took the shewbread, and ate thereof, and endowed also those who were with him, though it was not lawful to eat thereof, except to the priests alone?
And he said to them, The son of man is also lord of the sabbath.
And it also came to pass, on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and was teaching. And there was a man there, and his right hand was withered.
And the scribes and the Pharisees were observing whether he would be healed on a sabbath day, that they would find something to accuse him of.
And he knew their thoughts and said to the man who had the withered hand, Arise, and stand there before all. And getting up, he stood there.
Jesus therefore said to them, I will ask you whether it is lawful on the Sabbath day to do good or to do evil, to save life or to lose it?
And having looked around at them all, he said to him, Stretch out thy hand. And he did so; and his hand was made [healthy] like the other.
Blessed are you who are hungry now, for you will be satisfied; Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when men hate you, and when they cut you off [from their society], and insult you and reject your name as bad, because of the son of man.
Rejoice in that day and be trembling for joy, for, behold, great is your reward in heaven, for their fathers did so also unto the prophets.
But woe to you rich, for you have your consolation;
woe to you who are full, for you will be hungry; woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same to false prophets.
Jude [brother] of James, and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor;
and going down with them, he stopped in a united place, and the multitude of his disciples, and a great multitude of people from all Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea region of Tire and Sidon, who had come to hear it and to be healed of their diseases;
those also who were tormented by foul spirits were healed.
and all the multitude sought to touch him, for power came out from him, and she healed them all.
And he, lifting up his eyes to his disciples, said, Blessed are you poor, for yours is the kingdom of God;
And when the day was come, he called his disciples. And having chosen twelve of them, whom he also named apostles:
and those who are along the way are those who hear [the word]; then comes the devil, and he removes the word from their hearts, lest by believing they be saved.
And those who are on the rock are those who, when they hear the word, receive it with joy; and these have no root: they believe only for a time, and in the time of temptation they turn away.
And those who fell among the thorns are those who, having heard [the word] and gone away, are choked by cares and by riches and by the pleasures of life, * and they do not wear fruit when ripe.
But what is in the good soil are those who, having heard the word, hold it in an honest and good heart, and bear fruit with patience.
Now no one after having lit a lamp covers it with a vase, nor puts it under a bed; but he places it on a lamp base, so that those who enter may see the light.
For there is nothing secret that will not become manifest, and nothing hidden that will not be known and come to the fore.
Take heed therefore how you hear; for whosoever has it shall be given, and from whosoever hath not, even that which he appears to have shall be taken away.
Now his mother and his brothers came to him; and they could not approach him because of the crowd.
And it was told to him by [some] who said: Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.
But he answering said to them: My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and put it into practice.
And it came to pass one of these days that he got into a boat, and his disciples [with him]. And he said to them: Let’s go to the other side of the lake. And they took off.
And as they were sailing, he fell asleep; and a rushing wind blew over the lake, and [the boat] was filling, * and they were in peril.
And they came and woke him up, saying, Master, master, we are perishing! And he got up and picked up the wind and the waves; and they subsided, and there was a calm.
And he said to them, Where is your faith? But they, terrified, were astonished, saying among themselves, Who then is this, who rules even the winds and the water, and they obey him?
And they landed in the land of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee.
And when he had come down to earth, a man from the city met him, who had long had demons, and wore no clothes, and did not dwell in a house, but in graves.
And when he saw Jesus, and cried out, he fell down before him, and said with a loud voice, What is it between me and you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don't torment me.
For [Jesus] commanded the foul spirit to come out of man; for long had he taken hold of him, and [the man] had been bound and kept in chains and with shackles on his feet; and breaking his bonds, he was carried by the demon into the deserts.
And Jesus asked him, saying, What is your name? And he said: Legion; for many demons had entered into him.
And they prayed to him * that he would not command them to go into the abyss **.
And there was a great herd of pigs there grazing on the mountain, and they begged him to let them enter into them; and he allowed them.
And the demons coming out of the man entered the pigs, and the herd rushed up from the hill into the lake, and was choked.
And those who grazed him, seeing what had happened, fled, and told it in the city and in the countryside.
And they went out to see what had happened, and came to Jesus, and found seated, clothed and in his good sense, at the feet of Jesus, the man from whom demons had gone out; and they were afraid.
And those who had seen [what had happened] also told them how the demonic was delivered.
And all the multitude of the land round about the Gadarenes begged Jesus to depart from their house, for they were terrified with great fear: and he getting into the boat, turned back.
And the man from whom the demons had come begged him [to allow] to be with him;
but he sent him away, saying, Return to your house and tell all that God has done to you. And he went, posting all over the city all that Jesus had done to him.
And when Jesus returned, it came to pass that the crowd welcomed him, for all were waiting for him.
And behold, a man whose name was Jairus, and he was ruler of the synagogue, came, and, falling at Jesus' feet, begged him to come to his house,
for he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. And as he was leaving, the crowds hugged him.
And a woman who had had a loss of blood for twelve years, and who, having spent all her possessions on doctors, could not be cured by any,
approached from behind and touched the hem of his garment; and instantly his blood loss stopped.
And Jesus said, Who is it that touched me? And as all denied, Peter said, and those who were with him, Teacher, * the crowds are pressing together and pressing you, and you say, Who is it that touched me?
And Jesus said, Someone touched me, for I know that power came out of me.
And the woman, seeing that she was not hidden, came trembling, and, throwing herself before him, declared before all the people why she had touched him, and how she had been instantly healed.
And he said to her: Have good courage, * [my] daughter; your faith has healed you **; go in peace.
While he was still speaking, someone from the synagogue head came and said to him: Your daughter is dead, do not torment the master.
And Jesus hearing her answered her, saying, Fear not, only believe, and she will be saved.
And when he got home, he allowed no one to enter, except Peter and John and James, and the girl’s father and mother.
And all wept and lamented over her; and he said to them, Weep not, for she is not dead, but is sleeping.
And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
But he put them all out and took her by the hand, and cried out, saying, Young girl, get up.
And her spirit returned [to her], and she arose immediately; and he gave orders to give him something to eat.
And his parents were beside themselves; and he enjoined them not to tell anyone what had happened.
And having assembled the twelve, he gave them power and authority over all demons, and [power] to heal diseases.
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God and to heal the infirm;
and he said unto them, Take nothing for the way, neither staff, nor sack, nor bread, nor money; and do not each have two tunics.
And whatever house you enter, there stay, and from there go.
And all those who will not receive you, ... leaving that city, even shake the dust off your feet, as a testimony against them * ..
And so they went through all the villages, evangelizing and healing everywhere.
And Herod the Tetrarch heard of all the things that were done by him; and he was perplexed, because some said that John had risen from the dead;
and some, that Elijah had appeared; and others that one of the ancient prophets was resurrected.
And Herod said: I had John beheaded; but who is this, from whom do I hear such things? and he was trying to see it.
And the apostles returning, told him all that they had done. And taking them with him, he withdrew apart into a deserted place of a city * called Bethsaida.
And the crowds, knowing it, followed him. And having received them, he spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and healed those who needed healing.
And the day began to fade; and the twelve approaching, said unto him, Send away the multitude, that they may go into the villages and the surrounding fields, and lodge there and find food, for we are here in a desert place.
But he said to them, You give them something to eat. And they said, We have no more than five loaves of bread and two fishes, unless we go and buy food for all this people;
for they were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Sit them down in rows of fifty each.
And so they did, and made them all sit down.
And having taken the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and broke them; and he gave them to his disciples to put them before the crowd.
And they all ate and were satisfied; and out of what was left of them, twelve baskets were picked up.
And it came to pass, as he was praying aside, that his disciples were with him. And he asked them, saying, Who say the crowds that I am?
And answering, they said: John the Baptizer; and others: Elijah; and others that one of the ancient prophets is resurrected.
And he said to them, And you, who do you say that I am? And Peter, answering, said: The Christ of God!
And addressing them forcefully, he commanded them not to tell this to anyone,
saying, The Son of man must suffer greatly, and be rejected of the elders and the chief priests and scribes, and be put to death, and be raised on the third day.
And he said to all: If anyone wants to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross every day, and follow me:
for whoever wants to save his life will lose it *; and whoever loses * his life for the sake of me, that one will save him.
For what will a man profit if he gains the whole world, whether he destroys * himself or loses himself?
For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his glory and in that of the Father and of the holy angels.
And I tell you, verily, that of those present here there are some who will not taste death until they have seen the kingdom of God.
And it came to pass, about a week after these words, that he took with him Peter and John and James, and went up a mountain to pray.
And as he was saying these things, a cloud came and covered them; and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
And there was a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him.
And when the voice was heard, Jesus was found alone. And they were silent, and told no one in those days what they had seen.
And it came to pass the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, that a great crowd met him.
And behold, a man of the crowd cried out, saying, Master, * I beseech thee, look upon my son, for he is my only one.
and behold, a spirit seized him; and suddenly he cries; and he tears it apart, causing it to foam; and he barely pulls himself away from him after crushing him.
And as he prayed, the appearance of his face changed completely, and his garment became white [and] shining like lightning;
and behold, two men, who were Moses and Elijah, were talking with him.
And it came to pass, as they were parting from him, that Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good that we are here; and let us make three tents: one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah, not knowing what he was saying.
Yerusal? M to whom, appearing in glory, spoke of his death which he was about to fulfill in Jerusalem.
And Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep; and when they were awakened, they saw his glory and the two men who were with him.
and I begged your disciples to drive him out, and they could not.
And Jesus answering said: O unbelieving and perverse generation, how long will I be with you and endure you? Bring your son here.
And again, as he approached, the demon knocked him down and tormented him violently; but Jesus rebuked the foul spirit, and healed the child, and restored him to his father.
And all were amazed at the greatness of God. And as everyone was amazed at all that Jesus was doing, he said to his disciples:
You, keep well these words which you have heard, for the Son of man will be delivered into the hands of men.
But they did not understand this saying, and it was hidden from them, so that they did not understand it; and they were afraid to question him concerning this word.
And there arose in the midst of them a question, [namely] which of them would be * the greatest.
But Jesus, seeing the thought of their hearts, took a little child, and placed him near him;
and he said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this little child in my name receives me; and whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For he who is the smallest among you all, it is he who is great.
And John, responding, said: Teacher, we have seen someone casting out demons in your name, and we have forbidden him, because he does not follow [you] with us.
And Jesus said unto him, Do not forbid him, * for he that is not against you is for you.
Now it came to pass, as the days of his assumption were coming to pass, that he set up his face resolutely to go to Jerusalem.
and he sent messengers before his face. And having gone, they entered into a village of the Samaritans to prepare [a dwelling] for it;
and they did not receive him, because his face was turned toward Jerusalem.
And his disciples, James and John, seeing this, said, Lord, do you want us to say that fire should come down from heaven and consume them, as Elijah also did?
And, turning, he strongly censored them [and said: You do not know what spirit you are animated with]!
And it came to pass, as they were going by the way, that a certain man said unto him, Lord, I will follow you wherever you go.
And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have dens, and the birds of the air have dwellings; but the son of man has nowhere to lay his head.
And he said to another, Follow me; and he said, Lord, let me first go and bury my father.
And Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead; but you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.
And another also said: I will follow you, Lord; but let me first take leave of those in my house.
And Jesus said to him, No one who has put his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.
Now after these things the Lord also appointed seventy others, and sent them two by two before his face to all the cities and to all the places where he himself was to go.
He said therefore to them, The harvest is great, but the laborers are few: therefore pray to the Lord of the harvest, that he may push laborers into his harvest.
Come on; behold, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves.
Do not carry a purse, bag or sandals; and do not greet anyone on the way.
But, in whatever house you enter, say first: Peace on this house!
And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on it *, otherwise it will return to you.
And dwell in one house, eating and drinking of what [shall be offered] from them; for the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not go from house to house.
And whatever city you enter and receive you, eat of what will be laid before you.
and heal the infirm that are there, and say to them, The kingdom of God is come near to you.
But in whatever city you have entered and you are not received, go out into its streets and say:
The very dust of your city, which is clinging to our feet, * we shake against you; but know this, that the kingdom of God is at hand.
I tell you that the fate of Sodom will be more bearable in that day than that of that city.
Woe to you, Chorazin! woe to you, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works which were done in you had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes;
but the fate of Tire and Sidon at judgment will be more bearable than yours.
And you, Capernaum, who were lifted up to heaven, will be brought down even in Hades.
a Whoever listens to you listens to me; and he who rejects you rejects me; and he who rejects me rejects him who sent me.
And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are subject to us in your name.
And he said to them, I saw Satan falling like lightning from heaven.
Behold, I give you authority to tread over serpents and scorpions, and over all the might of the enemy; and nothing will harm you;
however do not rejoice that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice because your names are written in heaven.
At that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the spirit and said: I praise you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and the understanding, and you have revealed them to little children. . Yes, Father, for this is what you have found good in front of you.
All things have been delivered to me by my Father; and no one knows who the Son is except the Father; nor who is the Father, except the Son, and anyone to whom the Son wills to reveal him.
And turning to the disciples, he said to them in particular: Blessed are the eyes that see what you see!
For I say to you, that many prophets and [many] kings desired to see the things which you see, and they did not see them, and to hear the things which you hear, and they did not hear them.
And, behold, a teacher of the law rose up to test him, and said, Teacher, what must I have done to inherit eternal life?
And he said unto him, What is written in the law? How do you read
And responding, he said: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind"; "And your neighbor as yourself"
And it came to pass, as they were on their way, that he entered a village. And a woman named Marthe received him into her house.
And she had a sister called Mary, who also, sitting at the feet of Jesus *, listened to his word;
but Marthe was distracted by a lot of service. And having come to Jesus, she said, Lord, do you not care that my sister leaves me all alone to serve? So tell her to help me.
And Jesus answering her said: Martha, Martha, you are worried and you are worried about many things,
but you only need one; and Marie chose the good part that will not be her
And while he was praying in a certain place, it came to pass, after he had ceased, that one of his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say: Father, hallowed be thy name; your kingdom come;
give us the bread we need every day;
and forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive all those who owe us; and do not lead us into temptation *.
and likewise also a Levite, having come to that place, came, and, seeing it, passed over to the other side;
but a Samaritan, going his way, came to him, and seeing him, was moved with compassion.
and came near and bandaged his wounds, pouring oil and wine into them; and putting him on his own beast, he brought him into the inn and looked after him.
And the next day, going away, he took out two denarii and gave them to the host, and said to him, Take care of him; and what you spend more, I, on my return, I will give you back.
Which of these three do you think was next to the one who fell into the [hands of] thieves?
And he said, This is he who showed mercy on him. And Jesus said unto him, Go, and do likewise.
and he that is in it, answering, will say, Bother me not; the door is already closed, and my children are in bed with me; I can't get up and give it to you.
I tell you that although he does not get up and give it to her because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity * he will get up and give him as much as he needs .
And I say to you: Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you;
So if you who are wicked know how to give good things to your children, how much more will the Father who is from heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him.
And he cast out a demon that was silent. And it came to pass that when the devil was gone out, the mute spoke; and the crowds were amazed.
But some of them said: He casts out demons by Beelzebub, the leader of the demons.
And others, to test him, asked him for a sign from heaven.
for whoever asks, receives; and he who seeks, finds; and to him who knocks it will be opened.
Who is the father of you from whom his son will ask for a loaf of bread and who will give him a stone? or also, [if he asks] a fish, will give him, instead of a fish, a snake?
And he said unto them, Who shall be among you who, having a friend, come unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves of bread?
And he said unto him, Thou hast well answered; do this, and you will live.
But he, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus: And who is my neighbor?
if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
And Jesus answering said: A man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell into the hands of thieves, who also, stripping him and covering him with wounds, went away, leaving him half dead. .
because my friend has arrived at my house from a trip, and I have nothing to present to him?
by chance, a priest went down that way, and seeing it, passed on to the other side.
A queen of the south will rise up in judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, there is more here than Solomon.
Men of Nineveh will stand up in judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, there is more here than Jonah.
Now no one, after having lit a lamp, puts it in a hidden place, nor under a bushel, but on a lamp base, so that those who enter may see the light.
The lamp of the body is your eye; when your eye is simple, your whole body too is full of light; but when it is mean, your body is also dark.
Take care therefore that the light which is in you is not darkness.
And one of the doctors of the law, answering, said to him, Teacher, * in saying these things you are also cursing us.
And he said, Woe to you also, teachers of the law! for you burden men with burdens which are difficult to bear, and you yourselves do not touch these burdens with one of your fingers.
Woe to you! for ye build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers slain them.
You therefore bear witness to the works of your fathers and you take pleasure in them; for they killed them, and you build their graves.
And others, to test him, asked him for a sign from heaven.
But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom divided against itself shall be reduced to a wilderness; and a house [divided] against itself * falls.
and if Satan too is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? because you say that I drive out demons by Beelzebub.
Now if it is by Beelzebub that I cast out demons, your sons, by whom do they cast them out? That is why they themselves will be your judges.
But if I cast out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come to you.
When a strong man, clothed in his arms, guards his palace *, his goods are at peace;
but if there comes one stronger than he who defeats him, he takes off his armor in which he trusted, and shares his spoils.
He who is not with me is against me; and he who does not gather with me, scatters.
When the foul spirit has gone out of a man, he goes through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he said, I will return to my house from which I came out.
And having come there, he finds it swept and adorned.
So he goes, and takes seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and having entered, they dwell there; and the last condition of that man is worse than the first.
And it came to pass, as he said these things, that a woman lifted up her voice out of the crowd, and said unto her, Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts which you suckled.
And he said: Rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
And as the crowds gathered, he began to say: This generation is a wicked generation; she asks for a sign; and no sign will be given to him, except for Jonah's sign.
For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so also will be the son of man to this generation.
Therefore also the wisdom of God said: I will send prophets and apostles to them, and they will kill and drive out with persecution:
so that the blood of all the prophets that has been shed from the foundation of the world will be asked again of this generation.
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who perished between the altar and the house: yes, I tell you, it will be asked again of this generation.
Woe to you, teachers of the law! for you have taken away the key of knowledge: you yourselves did not enter in, and you hindered those who entered.
And as he said these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him strongly; and they provoked him to talk about several things.
setting traps for him, and trying to catch something out of his mouth, in order to accuse him.
However, the crowds having gathered by the thousands, so that they were treading on one another, he began, first of all, to say to his disciples: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is the hypocrisy.
But there is nothing covered that will not be revealed, and nothing secret that will not be known.
So if your whole body is full of light, having no dark part, it will be full of light, as when the lamp shines on you.
And as he spoke, a Pharisee begged him to dine with him; and entering, he sat down to table.
But the Pharisee, seeing [this], was astonished because he had not first washed before dinner.
And the Lord said unto him, As for you, Pharisees, ye cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within you are full of robbery and wickedness.
Fools! he who made the outside, did he not also make the inside?
But give alms of what you have; and behold, all things will be clear to you.
But woe to you Pharisees! for you pay the tithe of the mint and the rue * and all kinds of grass, and you neglect the judgment and the love of God: these things had to be done, and these things not to be left.
Woe to you Pharisees! for you like the first seats in synagogues, and greetings in public places.
Woe to you! for ye are like sepulchres which do not appear; and the men stepping on it know nothing about it.
Whoever confesses me before men, the Son of man will also confess him before the angels of God;
And I say to you, but whoever denies me before men will be denied before the angels of God.
And whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whoever speaks insulting words against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
And when they bring you before the synagogues and the magistrates and the authorities, do not worry how, or what thing you will answer, or what you will say;
for the Holy Spirit will teach you right now what to say.
This is why all the things you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what you have spoken in the ear in the chambers will be published on the rooftops.
But I say to you, my friends: Do not be afraid of those who kill the body and who after that can do nothing more;
but I will show you whom you must fear: fear him who, after having killed, has the power to throw into hell *: yes, I say to you, fear him.
Don't we sell five sparrows for two cents *? and not a single one of them is forgotten before God.
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. So fear not: you are better than many sparrows.
And someone said to him from among the crowd, Teacher, * tell my brother to share the inheritance with me.
But he said unto him, Man, who hath appointed me over you [to be your] judge and to divide you?
And he said unto them, See, and beware of all greed; for although someone is rich, his life is not in * his possessions.
And he spake unto them a parable, saying, The fields of a rich man yielded much;
and he reasoned within himself, saying, What shall I do, for I have not where I can gather my fruit?
And he said, This is what I will do: I will break down my barns, and build larger ones, and will assemble therein all my products and my goods;
and I will say to my soul: [My] soul, you have many goods assembled for many years; rest, eat, drink, eat dear.
But God said to him: Fool! this very night your soul will be asked for again; and these things which thou hast prepared, to whom shall they be?
So it is with one who gathers treasures for himself, and who is not rich as regards God. NOT?? yap t ?? m n ?? Yes.
And he said to his disciples, Because of this I say to you, Do not worry for life, what you will eat; nor for the body, what you will be wearing:
life is more than food, and the body more than clothing.
Consider the crows: they * neither sow nor reap, and they have no storehouse or barn; and God feeds them: how much better are you than the birds!
And who among you, for your own concern, can add an * cubit to your height?
If then you cannot even what is very small, why are you bothering about the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither work nor spin; yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these.
And if God thus clothes the grass which is today in the field and which tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he [clothe] you, people of little faith!
And you, do not look for what you will eat or what you will drink, and do not worry about it;
for the nations of the world seek all these things, and your Father knows that you need these things;
but seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you above.
Fear not, little flock, * for it has pleased your Father to give you the kingdom.
Sell ??what you have, and give alms; make for yourselves purses which do not grow old, a treasure which does not fail, in the heavens, whither thief does not approach, and where moth does not destroy;
for where your treasure is, there will also be your heart.
Let your loins be girdled * and your lamps alight;
and be yourselves like men who await their master * whenever he returns from the wedding feast, so that when he comes and knocks, they immediately open it to him.
Blessed are these slaves whom the master * will find watching when he comes. Truly I tell you that he will gird himself ** and have them sit down to table, and coming forward he will serve them.
And if he comes on the second watch *, and if he comes on the third, and finds them so, blessed are those [slaves] there.
But know this, that if the master of the house had known at what time the thief was due to come, he would have kept watch and would not have allowed his house to be breached.
So you too be ready; for at a time which you do not think, the son of man is coming.
And Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable for us, or also for all?
And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful and prudent steward whom the lord * shall appoint over the servants of his house, to give them their ration of wheat in due season?
Blessed is that slave, whom his master when he comes will find doing so.
Truly I say to you that he will establish it over all his possessions.
But if that slave says in his heart, My master is late in coming, and he begins to beat the male and female servants, and to eat and to drink, and to get drunk,
the master of that slave will come in a day which he does not expect, and at an hour which he does not know, and he will cut him in two, and give him his share with the infidels.
Now this slave who knew his master's will, and who did not prepare and did not according to his will, will be beaten with many blows;
and he who hath not known it, and hath done things which are worthy of blows, shall be beaten with a few stripes: for whosoever shall have been given much, much more will be demanded; and to the one to whom much has been entrusted, it will be * asked for more.
I have come to throw fire on the earth; and what do I want *, if it is already on?
But I have to be baptized with a baptism; and how cramped am I until it's done!
Do you think I came to give peace on earth? No, I tell you; but rather the division.
For henceforth there will be five in one house, divided: three will be divided against two, and two against three;
the father against the son, and the son against the father; mother against daughter, and daughter against mother; the stepmother against her stepdaughter, and the stepdaughter against her stepmother.
And he also said to the crowds: When you see a cloud rising from the west, immediately you say: A shower is coming; and so it happens.
And when [you see] the south wind blowing, you say: It will be hot; and it happens.
Hypocrites! you know how to discern the appearances of the earth and the sky, and how do you not discern this time?
And why also don't you judge for yourselves what is right?
For when you go with your adversary before the magistrate, strive on the way to be delivered from him, lest they draw you before the judge; and the judge will deliver you to the sergeant, and the sergeant will put you in prison.
I tell you that you will not get out of there, that you have not paid until the last pite *.
But at the same time, some were present there, who told him [what had happened] concerning the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
And [Jesus] answering said unto them, Do you believe that these Galileans were more sinners than all the Galileans, because they suffered such things?
No, I tell you; but if you do not repent, you will all perish in the same way.
Or, those eighteen on whom the tower fell in Siloam, and whom it killed, do you think they were more guilty * than all the men who inhabit Jerusalem?
No, I tell you; but if you do not repent, you will all likewise perish.
And he was saying this parable: There is one who had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came to seek fruit therein, and found none.
And he said to the husbandman, These three years have I come to seek fruit on this fig tree, and have not found any: cut it; why also does he needlessly occupy the earth?
And he laid his hands on her: and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.
And the ruler of the synagogue, indignant that Jesus had healed on a Sabbath day, answering, said to the crowd: There are six days when it is necessary to work; come therefore on those days, and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.
The Lord therefore answered him, and said, Hypocrites! Do not each of you take his ox or donkey out of the manger on the Sabbath day, and bring them to drink?
And this one which is the daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound, behold, eighteen years ago, should she not be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day?
And as he said these things, all his adversaries were covered with shame; and all the crowd rejoiced at all the great things that were done by him.
And he said, To what is the kingdom of God like, and to what shall I compare it?
It is like a mustard seed that a man took and threw in his garden, and it grew and became a great tree, and the birds of the air dwelt in its branches.
And answering, he said to him: Master, leave it this year also, until I have taken it off and put manure in it.
Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on a Sabbath day.
And behold, there was a woman there with a crippled spirit for eighteen years, and she was hunched over and couldn't stand up a bit.
And Jesus, seeing her, called her and said to her, Woman, thou art delivered from thy infirmity.
And he said again, To what shall I compare the kingdom of God?
It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid among three measures of flour, until it was leavened.
And he went through the towns and through the villages, teaching, and going on his way to Jerusalem.
And one said unto him, Lord, are they few in number who are to be saved?
And he said unto them, Strive to enter by the narrow gate; for many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able.
As soon as the master of the house has risen and closed the door, and you begin to stand outside and knock on the door, saying, Lord, open to us! and that, answering, he will say to you: I do not know you [nor know] where you are from;
then you will begin to say: We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.
And he will say: I say to you, I do not know you, [nor know] where you are from; depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.
There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you cast out.
And it will come from the east and the west, and from the north and from the south; and they will sit in the kingdom of God.
And behold, there are last who will be first, and there are first who will be last.
On that same day, * the Pharisees came, saying to him, Depart and go out of here; for Herod wants to kill you.
And he said unto them, Go, say unto this fox, Behold, I cast out demons and perform healings today and tomorrow, and on the third day I am consumed.
But I must walk today and tomorrow and the next day, for a prophet cannot perish outside of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, [the city] which kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it, how many times have I wanted to gather your children together, like a hen brood under her wings, and you did not want it!
Behold, your house is abandoned to you; and I say to you, that you will not see me until it happens that you say: Blessed is he who comes in the name of the * Lord *!
And it came to pass that as he entered on a Sabbath into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread, they were keeping him.
And behold, there was a man with dropsy before him.
And Jesus answering spake to the teachers of the law and to the Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to be healed on the sabbath day?
And they fell silent. And having taken him, he healed him, and sent him away.
